---
title: Minimizing Data Humanely
tags: data, efficiency
---

Recently I received an email in the form of a newsletter from a well known fantasy author whose blog I follow. Within it, I was amazed to find, were not only the usual updates and relevant links, but also the first chapter of a new book in its entirety provided as a preview. Upon first seeing this, it seemed to me a somewhat extravagant use of data, after all, sending each subscriber so large a message would surely put a strain on whichever email service used, especially any home grown one. Granted that most services have been reinforced to the point that even immensely exaggerated emails no longer cause errors when sent out in mass, this still seemed worth considering given the sheer amount of information present.

However, that last point hits upon the head of this rather interesting issue: *information*. Information, as I will use the term, is not the measure of the **amount** of data in KB/MB/... but rather the understanding it conveys to the human mind which interprets that data. It's the way humans understand information that we hit upon a remarkable irony, there are various things which convey huge amounts of information with very little data and others which convey almost nothing with an underlying foundation of massive data.

Anyone who has opened a website is surely aware of this irony in terms of images. Many websites use the aesthetic of images to convey a certain type of information: feelings about the design of that site and the people who run it, to set the mood of an article, or to engage users. As tools to this end, images serve an important purpose, but they fulfill it only through the consumption of immense amounts of data, especially when we consider the other end of the spectrum: text. Unlike images, text consumes almost no data, but is an incredibly potent instrument to convey human stories. For example, the entirety of James Joyce's _Ulysses_ stored as uncompressed text is less than 2 Megabytes. The entire novel takes up as much page as a header image on a news article! However, the comparative impact of the two upon the human reader is dramatic. The novel contains so much more information than the picture that we perceive it as dramatically larger, and this leads to an interesting question - how can we convey more information whilst simultaneously sending less data over the wire.

Some options are come, of course, at the cost of engagement and design. Sending text instead of a formatted document is much more efficient and conveys much more information, but loses somewhat of the feel of a more stylized document. However, there do exist some happy mediums between. Consider the phenomena of newspapers. Modern newspapers are able to produce multi-colored images through the printing of a collection of multicolored dots at so fine a resolution as to produce a coherent whole image, in the same way that a collection of individually colored pixels appear as a cohesive image. However, in the past this manner of printing was impossible, and the only way of preparing images was to print them as text was printed, out of a stamped engraving. In order to do this an artist would replicate a photograph onto an etching, which in turn would be used in the printing of the paper. Again, we find an analog in the web, this time with vector images, namely SVGs. The advantage, of course, of both these formats is that they prioritize the important shapes of a scene, while discounting any noise or unnecessary gradations present in a picture, hence they are much smaller than their more detailed counterparts. Moreover, thanks to modern algorithms it is quite possible to convert an image into an SVG with a high degree of accuracy. Combingin i
