---
title: The Benefits of System Fonts
tags: web, typography
---


Most of the history of web design has been characterized by the use of excellent
and beautiful typography. In this it borrows massively from the land of print
typography, which, until the development of mobile applications seemed to be the
gold standard for all web design. However, in recent years what we value in a
website has slowly begun to change. For instance, most web sites these days are
actually *applications* and as such tend to be focused primarily on allowing a
user to do work. And, the simple truth is, when working, one doesn't care for
design as much as the comfort one has with a program. Because almost every
desktop application inherits the system font, using it through the web can help
make an application eminently more approachable.

However, there is another, and more compelling reason for using system fonts:
ease of entry. Suppose you are an incoming web developer or designer hopping to
make a site your customers will really appreciate. It takes a lot of hard work
and a significant amount of study to make typography choices that most suit your
users. Now, you might think that, yes, while truly **excellent** typography
requires all that, merely using some proven combinations is enough to improve a
site. But is it?

See, the moment we start including custom font's we're forced to deal with the
host of issues they present to website design. For one, their is the dreaded
re-paint after the site is loaded and the font is applied. For another there is
the amount of data it takes to download a custom font, especially, as is the
usual case, when there are multiple custom fonts used on a site. What's left is
a somewhat slower, slightly jerkier experience for a user, which, although to
an extent mitigateable, is not entirely avoidable. So the question becomes, is
the site's typography combinations good enough to warrant slower page loads and
content repaints?

The simple truth is that most web developers don't have the time or skills to
apply to that typography, and even when we do, it's hard to find a usecase where
a user will care more about the *style* of presentation of data then its
*clarity*. There are, of course, exceptions, but for many, the use of web fonts
can introduce a complexity that not only adds much work overhead but actually
*decreases* a user's satisfaction with the site. That's why the only font's used
in this site are entirely bog standard to the operating system: because there is
no way that I can possible figure out a font combination that is more impactful
than a faster load time `:-]`.
